docs/11DIT/Programming/02.Maths.md, before:

---
marp: true
footer: |
  Copyright © 2025 by Onslow College. Available under the [CC BY 3.0 NZ](https://github.com/OnslowCollege/LearningMaterials/blob/main/LICENSE.md) license on [GitHub](https://github.com/OnslowCollege/LearningMaterials).
paginate: true
theme: onslow
title: Mathematics
---

<!-- _class: title -->
<!-- _paginate: skip -->

# Mathematics

## Pāngarau

| | | | |
| --: | :-- | --: | :-- |
| **AS** | 92004 | **Credits** | 5 |
| **Level** | 1 | **Type** | Internal |
| **Date published** | Dec 2023 | **Version** | 3 |

| Paetae • A | Kaiaka • M | Kairangi • E |
| :-: | :-: | :-: |
| Create a computer program | Create a **refined** computer program | Create a **robust** computer program |

---

<!-- _class: lisc -->
<!-- _paginate: skip -->

# Learning intentions

## Koronga ako

**In this lesson, you will learn**:

1. what an integer is
2. the important properties of integers in a computer program
3. how to evaluate maths equations using integers

## Paearu angitū • Success criteria

**You will know that you have completed the intended learning when**:

1. you can describe what an integer is
2. you can explain what at least FOUR (4) of the maths operators are used for
3. you can ask the user a question and store their response in a variable
4. you can perform a calculation and print out the result in Python

---

<!-- _class: division -->

# Mathematics

## Pāngarau

---

# Integers

## Ngā tau tōpū

Integers are whole numbers, both positive and negative

Examples:

| | |
| :-: | :-- |
| `1` | One is a whole number. It is the smallest positive integer |
| `2` | Two is also a whole number |
| `42` | Integers are not limited to 1-9 |
| `-27` | Negative numbers can be whole numbers as well |
| `0` | Zero is considered a whole number with no value |

---

# Integers in code

## Ngā tau tōpū i te waehere

Integers can be used in mathematical operations You can add, subtract, multiply, and divide them. You can also save them for later in **variables**, the same as in algebra

<hr>

<div class="columns">

<div>

In the example below, the result of `8 + 3` is stored in the variable `x`

```python
x = 8 + 3
```

In this example, 9 is added to the value of `x` (11), resulting in 20

```python
x = x + 9
```

</div>

<div>

A new variable called `y` is created. It copies the value of `x`

The value of `x`, 20, is then added to the value of `y`, also 20, resulting in 40

```python
y = x
y = x + y
```

</div>

---

# Mathematical operators

## Ngā pāheko

Mathematical operators are used to tell Python what kind of calculation needs to be performed. In the  equation `5 + 7`, `5` is the left-hand side (LHS), `+` is the addition operator, and `7` is the right-hand side (RHS).

| Symbol | Meaning | Example | Answer |
| :-: | :-- | --: | :-- |
| `+` | Add the LHS to the RHS | `1 + 1` | `= 2` |
| `-` | LHS minus RHS | `20 - 30` | `= 10` |
| `*` | LHS multiplied by RHS | `7 * 8` | `= 56` |
| `/` | LHS divided by RHS | `30 / 10` | `= 3.0` |
| `%` | LHS divided by RHS, returning the remainder | `5 % 2` | `= 1` |

---

# Printing numbers

## Te tānga o ngā tau

<div class="columns">

<div>

You can print numbers using the `print()` function. The number goes inside the brackets, either directly…

```python
print(5)
```

… or a variable containing a number

```python
x = 5
print(x)
```

</div>

<div>

You can also print a maths expression, using either numbers, variables, or both

```python
x = 5
print(5 + 5)
print(x + x)
```

You can add text around a number. Write an `f` followed by `"`quote marks`"`; the number goes inside `{` curly brackets `}`

```python
print(f"You have {x} apples!")
```

</div>

</div>

---

# Asking for a number

## Te pātai mo tētahi tau

You can ask the user to provide a number using the `input()` function. Inside the brackets, provide a question to ask the user wrapped in quotation marks

```python
input("Enter a number: ")
```

However, the result will not be usable unless you store it in a variable

```python
user_input = input("Enter a number: ")
```

Once again, we have an issue. The result is not considered a number by Python, so you will need to convert it using the `int()` function

```python
user_input = input("Enter a number: ")
x = int(user_input)
```

---

<!-- _class: division -->

# Tātaitai mō te utu o he pūhera

## Postage cost calculator

---

# Postage cost calculator

## Tātaitai mō te utu o he pūhera

Calculate the price for sending parcels based on their size and weight

<div class="columns">

<div>

1. Ask the user for the width, height, and length of the parcel in centimetres
2. Ask the user for the weight in grams
3. Perform the following changes:
   - From the width, remove 1cm
   - From height, 2cm
   - From length, 3cm
   - From weight, 4g

</div>

<div>

4. Multiply all the numbers together
5. Add a service fee of $2
6. Divide the total by 1500
7. Round the answer to 2 decimal place and print with a dollar sign

For example, for a 30cm x 10cm x 20cm parcel that weights 15g, the customer would need to pay **$28.93**.

</div>

</div>

---

# Example output

## Putanga tauira

```plain
Welcome to the Parcel Post Calculator:

Enter the parcel's width in cm: 30
Enter the parcel's height in cm: 10
Enter the parcel's length in cm: 20
Enter the parcel's weight in g: 15

Your parcel will cost $28.93 to send.
Thank you for your business. Have a nice day. :-)
```

---

# Quiz

## Patapātai

Complete the quiz in your Google Classroom assignment

You will need to:

- explain what an integer is
- explain what a variable is used for
- choose the correct code to print the expected answer

---

<!-- _class: division -->

# Whakamutunga

## Conclusion

---

# Success criteria

## Paearu angitū

Now that this lesson has concluded, think about how confident you are in your understanding. Do you feel that:

1. you can explain what an integer is?
2. you can explain what at least FOUR (4) of the maths operators are used for?
3. you can ask the user a question and store their response in a variable?
4. you can perform a calculation and print out the result in Python?

Commit message:

11DIT: added disclaimer about division

docs/11DIT/Programming/02.Maths.md, after:

---
marp: true
footer: |
  Copyright © 2025 by Onslow College. Available under the [CC BY 3.0 NZ](https://github.com/OnslowCollege/LearningMaterials/blob/main/LICENSE.md) license on [GitHub](https://github.com/OnslowCollege/LearningMaterials).
paginate: true
theme: onslow
title: Mathematics
---

<!-- _class: title -->
<!-- _paginate: skip -->

# Mathematics

## Pāngarau

| | | | |
| --: | :-- | --: | :-- |
| **AS** | 92004 | **Credits** | 5 |
| **Level** | 1 | **Type** | Internal |
| **Date published** | Dec 2023 | **Version** | 3 |

| Paetae • A | Kaiaka • M | Kairangi • E |
| :-: | :-: | :-: |
| Create a computer program | Create a **refined** computer program | Create a **robust** computer program |

---

<!-- _class: lisc -->
<!-- _paginate: skip -->

# Learning intentions

## Koronga ako

**In this lesson, you will learn**:

1. what an integer is
2. the important properties of integers in a computer program
3. how to evaluate maths equations using integers

## Paearu angitū • Success criteria

**You will know that you have completed the intended learning when**:

1. you can describe what an integer is
2. you can explain what at least FOUR (4) of the maths operators are used for
3. you can ask the user a question and store their response in a variable
4. you can perform a calculation and print out the result in Python

---

<!-- _class: division -->

# Mathematics

## Pāngarau

---

# Integers

## Ngā tau tōpū

Integers are whole numbers, both positive and negative

Examples:

| | |
| :-: | :-- |
| `1` | One is a whole number. It is the smallest positive integer |
| `2` | Two is also a whole number |
| `42` | Integers are not limited to 1-9 |
| `-27` | Negative numbers can be whole numbers as well |
| `0` | Zero is considered a whole number with no value |

---

# Integers in code

## Ngā tau tōpū i te waehere

Integers can be used in mathematical operations You can add, subtract, multiply, and divide them. You can also save them for later in **variables**, the same as in algebra

<hr>

<div class="columns">

<div>

In the example below, the result of `8 + 3` is stored in the variable `x`

```python
x = 8 + 3
```

In this example, 9 is added to the value of `x` (11), resulting in 20

```python
x = x + 9
```

</div>

<div>

A new variable called `y` is created. It copies the value of `x`

The value of `x`, 20, is then added to the value of `y`, also 20, resulting in 40

```python
y = x
y = x + y
```

</div>

---

# Mathematical operators

## Ngā pāheko

In the  equation `5 + 7`, `5` is the left-hand side (LHS), `+` is the mathematical operator, and `7` is the right-hand side (RHS).

| Symbol | Meaning | Example | Answer |
| :-: | :-- | --: | :-- |
| `+` | Add the LHS to the RHS | `1 + 1` | `2` |
| `-` | LHS minus RHS | `20 - 30` | `10` |
| `*` | LHS multiplied by RHS | `7 * 8` | `56` |
| `/` | LHS divided by RHS | `30 / 10` | `3.0`* |
| `%` | LHS divided by RHS, returning the remainder | `5 % 2` | `1` |

\* The result of a division is always a floating-point number. We'll cover these later

---

# Printing numbers

## Te tānga o ngā tau

In Python, to **print** something means to put it on the screen

<hr>

<div class="columns">

<div>

You can print numbers using the `print()` function. The number goes inside the brackets, either directly…

```python
print(5)
```

… or a variable containing a number

```python
x = 5
print(x)
```

</div>

<div>

You can also print a maths expression, using either numbers, variables, or both

```python
x = 5
print(5 + 5)
print(x + x)
```

You can add text around a number. Write an `f` followed by `"`quote marks`"`; the number goes inside `{` curly brackets `}`

```python
print(f"You have {x} apples!")
```

</div>

</div>

---

# Asking for a number

## Te pātai mo tētahi tau

You can ask the user to provide a number using the `input()` function. Inside the brackets, provide a question to ask the user wrapped in quotation marks

```python
input("Enter a number: ")
```

However, the result will not be usable unless you store it in a variable

```python
user_input = input("Enter a number: ")
```

Once again, we have an issue. The result is not considered a number by Python, so you will need to convert it using the `int()` function

```python
user_input = input("Enter a number: ")
x = int(user_input)
```

---

<!-- _class: division -->

# Tātaitai mō te utu o he pūhera

## Postage cost calculator

---

# Postage cost calculator

## Tātaitai mō te utu o he pūhera

Calculate the price for sending parcels based on their size and weight

<div class="columns">

<div>

1. Ask the user for the width, height, and length of the parcel in centimetres
2. Ask the user for the weight in grams
3. Perform the following changes:
   - From the width, remove 1cm
   - From height, 2cm
   - From length, 3cm
   - From weight, 4g

</div>

<div>

4. Multiply all the numbers together
5. Add a service fee of $2
6. Divide the total by 1500
7. Round the answer to 2 decimal place and print with a dollar sign

For example, for a 30cm x 10cm x 20cm parcel that weights 15g, the customer would need to pay **$28.93**.

</div>

</div>

---

# Example output

## Putanga tauira

```plain
Welcome to the Parcel Post Calculator:

Enter the parcel's width in cm: 30
Enter the parcel's height in cm: 10
Enter the parcel's length in cm: 20
Enter the parcel's weight in g: 15

Your parcel will cost $28.93 to send.
Thank you for your business. Have a nice day. :-)
```

---

# Quiz

## Patapātai

Complete the quiz in your Google Classroom assignment

You will need to:

- explain what an integer is
- explain what a variable is used for
- choose the correct code to print the expected answer

---

<!-- _class: division -->

# Whakamutunga

## Conclusion

---

# Success criteria

## Paearu angitū

Now that this lesson has concluded, think about how confident you are in your understanding. Do you feel that:

1. you can explain what an integer is?
2. you can explain what at least FOUR (4) of the maths operators are used for?
3. you can ask the user a question and store their response in a variable?
4. you can perform a calculation and print out the result in Python?
